
# C# Misc Notes


### Initializing a variable defined with a type parameter using `default`

```csharp

private TItem currentItem = default(TItem);

```

The `currentItem` variable is defined by using the type parameter `TItem`. When the program is written and compiled, the actual type that will be substituted for `TItem` might not be known; this issue is resolved only when the code is executed. This makes it difficult to specify how the variable should be initialized. The temptation is to set it to `null`. However, if the type substituted for `TItem` is a `value` type, this is an illegal assignment. (You cannot set value types to `null`, only reference types.) Similarly, if you set it to `0` with the expectation that the type will be numeric, this will be illegal if the type used is actually a `reference` type. There are other possibilities as well; `TItem` could be a boolean, for example.

The default keyword solves this problem. The value used to initialize the variable will be determined when the statement is executed. If `TItem` is a reference type, `default(TItem)` returns null; if TItem is numeric, `default(TItem)` returns 0; if `TItem` is a boolean, `default(TItem)` returns `false`. If TItem is a struct, the individual fields in the struct are initialized in the same way. (Reference fields are set
to null, numeric fields are set to 0, and boolean fields are set to false.)

---

### Iterators

```csharp
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Collections;

class BasicCollection<T> : IEnumerable<T>
{
  private List<T> data = new List<T>();
  public void FillList(params T [] items)
  {
    foreach (var datum in items)
    {
      data.Add(datum);
    }
  }
  IEnumerator<T> IEnumerable<T>.GetEnumerator()
  {
    foreach (var datum in data)
    {
      yield return datum;
    }
  }
}

```

- The code in the `GetEnumeratormethod` defines an iterator. The compiler uses this code to generate an implementation of the `IEnumerator<T>` class containing a `Current` method and a `MoveNext` method.

---

### `Func<T, ...>` vs `Action<T, ...>`

`Func<T1, T2, ..., TResult>` takes 0 or more arguments (`T1`, `T2` and so on) and `return` a result of type `TResult`

`Action<T1, T2, ...>` takes 0 or more arguments, performs some action and returns `void`. Thus, `Action` is more like a subroutine.

---

### Delegates

References to methods, basically.

- Creating a delegate is a two-step process: you first declare the delegate type and
  then provide an implementation. (This is analogous to writing an interface and then
  instantiating a class implementing that interface.)

- The first step is done by using the delegate keyword and providing the signature for the delegate. For example, . NET includes the following definition of a `Comparison<T>` delegate.

  ```csharp
  namespace System
  {
    public delegate int Comparison<T>(T x, T y);
  }

  // Once you have the delegate, you can use it like this

  var list = Enumerable.Range(1, 10).Select(i => i * 3).ToList();
  // list  => [3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 30]

  // Provides an implementation of Comparison
  Comparison<int> alphabetically = (l, r) => l.ToString().CompareTo(r.ToString());

  // uses the comparison delegate as an argument to list.Sort
  list.Sort(alphabetically);
  // list => [12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 3, 30, 6, 9]
  ```

- it is a type/object that represents references to methods with a particular parameter list and return type and then calls the method in a program for execution when it is needed.

- A delegate will call only a method which agrees with its signature and return type. A method can be a static method associated with a class or can be an instance method associated with an object, it doesn’t matter.

In a `class`, make a `delegate` type, that create an instance of the `delegate`, and then in the class constructor, add methods to the delegate using `+=` operator. We can also remove methods from a `delegate` using `-=`.

We can also add methods outside of a constructor of a specific `class`, to make the whole thing more generalized. For example, we can make separate `Add` or `Remove` methods to add or remove delegates.

### The FUNC and ACTION Delegates

The .NET framework includes a couple of delegate “families” that can represent pretty much any function type:

- `Func<R>` represents a function that takes no arguments and returns a result of
  type `R` .
- `Func<T1, R>` represents a function that takes an argument of type `T1` and
  returns a result of type `R`.
- `Func<T1, T2, R>` represents a function that takes a `T1` and a `T2` and returns an `R`.

  And so on. There are delegates to represent functions of various “arities”.

Similarly

- Action represents an action with no input arguments.
- `Action<T1>` represents an action with an input argument of type `T1`.
- `Action<T1, T2>` and so on represent an action with several input arguments.

---

### Method Adapters

Method Adapters are just functions that when executed, execute other functions.

```csharp

void FinishFolding ()
{
  folder.StopFolding(0);
}

```



***

### Events

You declare an event in a class intended to act as an event source. An event source is usually a class that monitors its environment and raises an event when something significant happens.

`event delegateTypeName eventName`

---

## Binary Numbers and Indexers

### Binary and Hexadecimal numbers

- To make life a little easier for handling data that you want to treat as a collection of binary values, C# enables you to specify integer constants using binary notation. You indicate that a constant should be treated as a binary representation by prefixing it with `0b0`.

  ```csharp
    uint binData = 0b01111;
  ```

  **Note** that this is a 4-bit value, but an integer occupies 32 bits; any bits not specified are initialized to zero. You should also observe that when you specify an integer as a binary value, it is good practice to store the result as an unsigned int (`uint`).

- To help cope with long strings of bits, you can also insert the `_` character as a separator between blocks of digits, like this:

  ```csharp
    uint moreBinData = 0b0_11110000_01011010_11001100_00001111;  // the "_" is ignored by C# Compiler
  ```

- The same values can be specified using Hexa notation `0x0`

  ```csharp
    uint hexData = 0x0_0F;  // == binData
    uint moreHexData = 0x0_F0_5A_CC_0F;  // == moreBinData
  ```

- If you need to display the binary representation of an integer, you can use the `Convert.ToString` method. `Convert.ToString` is a heavily overloaded method that can generate a string representation of a range of data values held in different types. If you are converting integer data, you can additionally specify a numeric base (2, 8, 10, or 16), and the method will convert the integer to that base.

  ```csharp
    uint moreHexData = 0x0_F0_5A_CC_0F;
    Console.WriteLine($"{Convert.ToString(moreHexData, 2)}"); // displays 11110000010110101100110000001111
  ```

### Bitwise Operators

(all the examples below are accurate to 8 bits, C# though, uses 32 bits to store numbers)

- **The NOT (`~`) operator**: This is a unary operator that performs a bitwise complement. For example, if you take the 8-bit value `0b0_11001100` (204 decimal) and apply the `~` operator to it, you obtain the result `0b0_00110011` (51 decimal); all the `1`s in the original value become `0`s,and all the `0`s become `1`s.

- **The left-shift (`<<`)**: operator This is a binary operator that performs a left shift. The 8-bit expression `204 << 2` returns the value `48`. (In binary, `204` decimal is `0b0_11001100`, and shifting it left by two places yields `0b0_00110000`, or `48` decimal.) The far-left bits are discarded, and zeros are introduced from the right. There is a corresponding **right-shift operator(`>>`)**.

- **The OR (`|`) operator**: This is a binary operator that performs a bitwise OR operation, returning a value containing a 1 in each position in which either of the operands has a 1. For example, the 8-bit expression `204 | 24` has the value 220 (204 is `0b0_11001100`, 24 is `0b0_00011000`, and 220 is `0b0_11011100`).

- **The AND (`&`) operator**: This operator performs a bitwise AND operation. AND is similar to the bitwise OR operator, but it returns a value containing a 1 in each position where both of the operands have a 1. So,the 8-bit expression `204 & 24` is 8 (204 is `0b0_11001100`, 24 is `0b0_00011000`, and 8 is `0b0_00001000`).

- **The XOR (`^`) operator**: This operator performs a bitwise exclusive OR operation, returning a 1 in each bit where there is a 1 in one operand or theother but not both. (Two 1s yield a 0; this is the “exclusive” part of theoperator.) So the 8-bit expression 204 ^ 24 is 212 (0b0_11001100 ^0b0_00011000 is 0b0_11010100).

- Reasoning about bitwise operators on numbers is difficult, that where indexer come in.

### Indexers

- Indexers allow us to use square bracket notation to access individual values from a collection, which, without indexers, does not usually allow square brackets as data access operator.

- So, if we define an indexer, we can use `bits[5]`, where bits is a binary number, to access 6th value from the right.

- You introduce the indexer with the `this` keyword, specify the type of the value returned by the indexer, and also specify the type of the value to use as the index into the indexer between square brackets. The indexer for the `IntBits` struct uses an `integer` as its index type and returns a `Boolean` value.

  ```csharp
    struct IntBits
    {
      private int bits;
      public IntBits(int initialBitValue) => bits = initialBitValue;

      public bool this [ int index ]
      {
        get => (bits & (1 << index)) != 0;
        set
        {
          if (value) // turn the bit on if value is true; otherwise, turn it off
            bits |= (1 << index);
          else
            bits &= ~(1 << index);
        }
      }

      public override string ToString()
      {
        return (Convert.ToString(bits, 2);
      }
    }

  ```

- **NOTE:**

  - An indexer is not a method; there are no parentheses containing a parameter, but there are square brackets that specify an index. This index is used to specify which element is being accessed.
  - All indexers use the `this` keyword. A `class` or `structure` can define at most one indexer (although you can overload it and have several implementations), and it is always named `this`.
  - Indexers contain `get` and `set` accessors just like properties. In this example, the `get` and `set` accessors contain the complicated bitwise expressions.The `index` specified in the indexer declaration is populated with the index value specified when the indexer is called. The `get` and `set` accessor methods can read this argument to determine which element should be accessed.

- It is also good practice to provide a way to display the data in this structure. You can do this by overriding the `ToString` method and converting the value held in the structure to a string containing its binary representation.

- After you have created the indexer, you can use a variable of type `IntBits` instead of an `int` and apply the square bracket notation.

  ```csharp
    int adapted = 0b0_01111110;
    IntBits bits = new IntBits(adapted);
    bool peek = bits[6]; // retrieve bool at index 6; should be true (1)
    bits[0] = true; // set the bit at index 0 to true (1)
    bits[3] = false; // set the bit at index 3 to false (0)
    Console.WriteLine($""); // displays 1110111 (0b0_01110111)
  ```

---

---

## **`new` modifier**

When used as a declaration modifier, the `new` keyword explicitly hides a member that is inherited from a `base` class. When you hide an inherited member, the derived version of the member replaces the `base` class version. Although you can hide members without using the new modifier, you get a compiler warning. If you use new to explicitly hide a member, it suppresses this warning.

---

## Summary of keywords

| Keyword   | Interface | Abstract class | Class | Sealed Class | Structure |
| --------- | :-------: | :------------: | :---: | :----------: | :-------: |
| Abstract  |    No     |      Yes       |  No   |      No      |    No     |
| New       |    Yes    |      Yes       |  Yes  |     Yes      |    No     |
| Override  |    No     |      Yes       |  Yes  |     Yes      |    No     |
| Private   |    No     |      Yes       |  Yes  |     Yes      |    Yes    |
| Protected |    No     |      Yes       |  Yes  |     Yes      |    No     |
| Public    |    No     |      Yes       |  Yes  |     Yes      |    Yes    |
| Sealed    |    No     |      Yes       |  Yes  |     Yes      |    No     |
| Virtual   |    No     |      Yes       |  Yes  |      No      |    No     |

---
