# The Pigeonhole Principle

let k = +ve Int, if k + 1 things are put into k boxes, then there is at least one box containing two or more objects. (i.e. there are more pigeons than pigeonholes).

Proof (By Contraposition): Suppose none of the k boxes contained 2 things, then max number of things would be k, but we assumed there are k + 1 things. hence QED.

This principle is also called _Drichlet drawer principle_

We can use pigeonhole principle to prove other useful results.

Corollary 1: A function $f$ from a set, with $k+1$ or more elements, to a set with $k$ elements is not 1-2-1
Proof: 
    - (for a function to be 1-2-1 every domain element must have a unique element in codomain)
    - Suppose that for each element in the range/codomain of $f$ we have a box that contains all elements $x$ of the domain such that $f(x) = y$. 
    - Since there are only $k$ y, that means there should be at most $k$ x that match with all $y$s
    - but we know there are $k+1$ x's 
    - That means one of the $y$ in the range must have two $x$ pointing to it.
    - Hence the function cannot be 1-2-1

Example 1: Among any group of 367 people, there must be at least two with the same birthday, because there are only 366 possible birthdays.

Example 2: In any group of 27 English words, there must be at least two that begin with the same letter.

Example 3: How many students must be in a class to guarantee that at least two students receive the same score on the final exam, if the exam is graded on a scale from 0 to 100
    - 101

Example 4: Show that for every integer $n$ there is a multiple of $n$ that has only $0$s and 1s in its decimal expansion
    - Consider $n+1$ integers of the form: 1, 11, 111, 1111, 11...1 (the last one has $n + 1$ digits)
    - Since there are $n$ possible remainders when an integer is divided by $n$
    - Therefore, two of the above list of numbers must have the same remainder (since there are $n+1$ of them)
    - Since there are two of them, one must be larger than the other.
    - (Larger - Smaller) is a multiple of $n$ (Since they have the same remainder, this is true  $a \equiv b \pmod n$ i.e. n divides a - b)
    - (Larger - Smaller) is of the form 111000, e.g $1111 - 11 = 1100$ 
    - Hence the result

## Generalized Pigeonhole Principle

if $N$ objects are placed into $k$ boxes, then there is at least one box containing at least $\lceil N/k \rceil$.

Example: among any sets of 21 decimal digits, there must be three that are the same, because $\lceil 21 / 10 \rceil$ = 3

Proof (By Contraposition $\neg q \to \neg p$)
  - Suppose that the boxes contain at most $\lceil N / k \rceil - 1$ things (this is $\neg q$ , one less than $\lceil N / k \rceil$ )
  - then total number of things: 
  - $k (\lceil N / k \rceil - 1) < k ((N / k + 1) - 1) = N$ (where the inequality $\lceil N / k \rceil < (N / k) + 1$ has been used)
  - Thus, the total number of objects is less than N ($\neg p$) QED

Example: Among 100 people, there are at least $\lceil 100 / 12 \rceil = 9$ people who were born in the same month

Example: What is the minimum number of students required in a class to be sure that at least 6 will receive the same grade, if there are 5 possible grades A, B, C, D, F?
    - The minimum number of students to ensure that at least 6 students receive the same grade is the smalled integer N such that $\lceil N / 5 \rceil = 6$
    - Thus, N = 5 x 5 + 1 = 26

Example: How many cards must be selected from a standard deck of 52 cards to guarantee that at least three cards of the same suit are selected?
    - Since there are four suits, we must select one more than the number of cards that allow us to select two of each suit = 4 . 2 + 1 = 9
Example: How many must be selected from a deck to guarantee that at least three are hearts?
    - We do not use/need pigeonhole principle here 
    - to guarantee selection of 3 hearts, we must first use up and eliminate all other suits
    - so 39 cards to use up all the other suits, + 3 cards to get 3 hearts = 42