# Permutations & Combinations

*** 

## Permutations

A permutation of a set of disjoint objects is an _ordered_ arrangement of these objects.

An ordered arrangement of $r$ element of a set with elements $n$ is called an **r-permutation** and represented as $P(n, r)$ 
    - let S = {1, 2, 3}. 
    - The ordered arrangement [3, 1, 2] is a permutation of S
    - [2, 3] is a 2-perm of S


If $n$ is a +ve Int and $r$ is an Int with $1 ≤ r ≤ n$, then there are $P(n, r) = n(n-1)(n-2)...(n - r + 1)$ r-perms of a set with $n$ distinct elements.
    - Hueristic: take factorial of $n$ , till $r$ times
    - e.g. P(10, 3) = 10 * 9 * 8

$P(n,r) = \frac{n!}{(n-r)!}$  (can be proved with Product Rule)


Example: How many ways to select a 1st, 2nd and 3rd prize winner from 100 people?
Solution: 
    - Because it matters who wins which prize
    - therefore, $P(100,3) = 100 . 99 . 98 = 970,200

Example: How many permutations of the letters ABCDEFGH contain the string ABC?
Solution: 
    - Because the letters ABC must occur as a block, we can consider the problem to be a permutation of ABC + rest (5) = 6-perm problem
    - hence, 6! = 720 permutations of the letters


***

## Combinations

An **r-combination** of elements of a set of $n$ elements is an _un-ordered_ selection of $r$ elements from the set.
    - Thus, an r-comb is simply a subset of the set with $r$ elements.

The number of r-combs of a set with $n$ distinct elements is denoted by $C(n,r)$ . Also denoted by $\binom{n}{r}$  called **Binomial coefficient**
    
$C(n,r) = n! / r! (n - r)!$ 

$C(n,r) = P(n,r) / P(r,r)$ 

$C(n, r) = C(n, n - r)$ - useful for calculation involving big numbers


Example: How many ways are there to select 5 players from a 10-member team.
Solution: 
    - 5-comb
    - C(10, 5) = 10 * 9 * 8 * 7 * 6 / 5! = 252

Example: Select a group of 6 people out of 30 
    - C(30, 6) = 593,775

Example: How many ways to select a committee which has 3 members from math department (9 faculty members) and 4 from CS dept (11 faculty)
Solution: 
    - By the product rule, the answer is the product of the number of 3-comb of 9, and 4-comb of 11
    - C(9, 3) x C(11, 4) = 27,720

Example: How many bit Strings of length 10 with exactly 4 1s?
Solution: 
    - C(10, 4) = 210

In general, the positions of $r$ 1s in a bit string of length $n$ form an n-comb of the set {1, 2, 3, … n }. Hence, there are $C(n, r)$ bit strings of length $n$ that contain exactly $r$ 1s.

***

- A group contains n men and n women, how many ways to arrange them in a row if the men and women alternate
    - Answer: $2(n!)^2$ 
        - $n!$ for all men, $n!$ for all women, and then 2 possibilities whether a man sits first or a woman


- How many ways can a set of five letters be selected from the English alphabet
    - $C(26, 5)$ = 65780

- How many subsets with more than two elements does a set with 100 elements have?
    - Total number of subsets = $2^{100}$
    - subsets with 0 elements = 1
    - subsets with exactly 1 element = 100
    - subsets with exactly 2 elements = $C(100, 2)$ = 4950
    - Total subsets with at most 2 elements = 5051
    - Hence, answer = $2^{100} - 5051$ 

- How many ways for 8 men and 5 women to stand in line if no two women can stand next to each other
    - 9 possible places for 5 women (7 gaps between men, 2 at each end of the line)
    - Hence, total = 8! x 9P5 = 609,638,400

- How many ways for 4 men and 5 women to stand in line if 
    - All men stand together?
        - Since men for a unit, there are 6! ways for the whole group, times 4! ways that the line of men can form, hence 6! x 4!
    - All women stand together?
        - Same logic as first part, hence 5! x 5!