# Externals

An "external" is defined as something outside ourselves or outside our power. 

A great share of Stoic study amounts to the study of externals: what they are, how we misjugde them, and the ways that they tend to ensalve us.

Two Stoic principles about Externals 

1. Regard Externals without attachment 
    - Refusal to worry about things beyond our control or to otherwise get worked up about them. 
    - Detachment also means not letting happiness depend on getting or avoiding externals - wealth, or good opinions of another.
    - NOTE: we may have _preferences_ about those externals, e.g. everyone prefers to have more money than less, or to have more health than none. 
    - But we have to distinguish between preferences and attachment
    - The difference can be seens easily by noticing how we respond when some externals go against our wishes. 
    - Having something you prefer is pleasing (or not having something we do not want is pleasing), but not having it is not a huge disappointment for us, this is preference.
    - i.e. "Dont cry over spilled milk"

2. We have a hard time seeing externals accurately
    - Externals fool us, or we fool ourselves about them. 
    - Stoics offer some ways to get past those deceits
        - by taking a literal view of an external that seems exciting or scary
        - or by breaking it down into parts that one can see more clearly than the whole

Judgement and External are two side of the same coin. Judgement says that we have more control on things than we imagine, on the other hand, we attach ourselves to externals that we imagine we can control but really can't, and deceive ourselves about them routinely.

```
There is one rule of happiness - let this rule be at hand morning, noon, and night; stay detached from things that are not up to you. 

Epictetus
```

```
Not being able to govern events, I govern myself, and if they will not adapt to me, I adapt to them 

Montaigne
```

```
The ordinary man places his life's happiness in things external to him, in property, rank, wife and children, friends, society, and the like, so that when he loses them or finds them disappointing, the foundation of his happiness is destroyed. In other words, his center of gravity is not in himself; it is constantly changing its place, with every wish and whim.

Schopenhauer
```

## Slavery to externals 

Epictetus was a slave, he and other stoics spoke of attachment to externals as a kind of slavery.

```
Whoever then wishes to be free, let him neither wish for anything nor flee from anything that depends on others: otherwise he must be a slave.

Epictetus
```

```
In short , if you hear him say, "Wretched me, the things I have to endure!" call him a slave. If you see him wailing, or complaining, or in misery, call him a slave - a slave in a toga with a purple trim.

Epictetus
```

## Adding nothing to Externals

We have trouble resisting externals because they seem appealing or frightening or otherwise impressive; but they seem that way because we have not learned to see them as they are. 

The stoics offer two techniques to see unmask the externals: 

1. First is the practice of adding nothing when an external presents itself 

As soon as an event happens, it is tagged as "good" news, or "bad" news, we are quick to assign meaning. 

These assignment of values is often half-conscious, borrowed from convention, false, or unhelpful. So the stoics say that our thinking and imagination (not the creative type) must be slowed down.

```
"I have a headache." Do not add "Alas!" "I have an earache." Do not add "Alas!" I'm not saying that you cannot groan, but don't groan inside. 

Epictetus
```

2. The second technique is Subtraction (or reduction)

It is used for externals that are known to us, and that we have trouble seeing clearly because they are covered already with conventional meaning. One has to chip away at the romance or horror or other story that has been overlaid onto the thing, and to distinguish between what it is and what it is called.

One way to do that is to view and describe an external in the most literal way possible, or breaking it down into parts that dissolve the formidable appearance it might have, whether of desirability or reverse.

## Judging others 

Other people are externals as well, and we have as much trouble seeing them clearly as we do anything else. 

```
The pedestal is no part of the status. Measure him without his stilts; let him lay aside his wealth and his titles; let him present himself in his undershirt. Is his body healthy, active and able to perform its functions? what sort of soul does he have? is it beautiful and capable, and fortunate enough to have all of its parts intact? Is the soul rich in what it is own or rich in what it has borrowed? Has luck had anything to do with it? Can it face the drawing of swords without flinching? Is it indifferent between a death by expiration of breath or slitting of throat? Is it calm, unflustured, and content? This is what we must see; that is how the great differences between us should be judged.

Montaigne
```

*** 

Detachment from externals should NOT be confused with withdrawal from the world. In fact, Stoicism calls for active involvement in the public life, not retreat from it.