# Microservices

**Microservices** as opposed to **Monoliths**

- A monolith app contains all of the code required (Routing, Middlewares, Business Logic, DB Access etc) to implement all features of an application.
- A microservice contains all of the code required to implement _one_ feature of our app.

The #1 challenge with Microservices is: Managing data between different services.

Microservices store and access data in different way compared to monoliths
    - Each Service gets its own DB (if it needs one)
    - One service never, ever reaches into another service database to access data.

Why DB per service: 
    - We want services to run independently of other services.
    - A single DB shared b/w services would be a single point of failure, which would limit the reliability of our app.
    - DB schema structure of one service may change unexpectedly, and we want to eliminate the effects of such changes on other services.
    - We can optimize what type of DB we pick for a service, that is, some services might function more efficiently with different types of DB (SQL vs NoSQL)

## Sync vs Async Communication between services

NOTE: These two communication strategies have nothing in common with how the code is executed in JS.

**Sync:** services communicate with each other using direct requests (without any intermediary, like an event bus) whatever the form, e.g. http, json api etc.

Advantages 
    - conceptually easy to understand
    - Most Services won't need a DB, as they can directly request data from other relevant services
Disadvantages
    - Introduces a dependency between services.
    - If any inter-service request fails, the whole request fails. (Since one service could request to other service which could trigger request to other services and so on)
    - The entire request is only as fast as the slowest request
    - Can easily introduce a web of requests which can grow very complicated very quickly. 

**Async** - Using an intermediary like an event-based communication or an event bus

1. Method 1 (Not very good) - each service connects to a central event bus, where they can emit or receive events.
    Advantages 
        - Most services still do not need their own DB
    Disadvantages
        - Conceptually not easy to understand anymore
        - Single point of failure (Event bus)
        - One failed request fails the whole chain of events
        - Again leads to a complicated web of requests/events

2. Method 2 - Each service keeps its own DB where it keeps a copy of all the data it needs. Whenever a service gets updated, it emits a relevant event to our service to update its DB with new data, so for example, if a new product is created, an event is emitted by the Product service to our service, to update the list of products.

      Advantages
          - Most services have ZERO dependencies on other services (since they always keep all the relevant data up to date in their own DB)
          - Most services therefore will be very fast (as they do not need to shoot events to other services and wait for them to finish)
      Disadvantages
          - Data Duplication
              - NOTE: The cost of storing additional data is NOT a disadvantage, as data storage is VERY cheap.
              - By data duplication, we mean complexity of making sure the data is accurate and up to date in all of the copies for all services
          - Harder to understand.