# Kubernetes

## Terminology

1. Kubernetes Cluster - A collection of nodes + a master to manage them
2. Node - A virtual Machine that will run our containers
3. Pod - More or less a running container. Technically, a pod can run multiple containers.
4. Deployment - Monitors a set of pods, make sure they are running and restarts them if they crash.
5. Provides an easy-to-remember URL to access a running container.

### Kubernetes Config files

Config files tell kubernetes about the different Deployments, Pods and Services (referred to as Objects) that we want to create.

Written in YAML.

We can create Objects directly w/o Config files - but only do this when testing.

## Commands 

- Create a pod 
    - `kubectl apply -f <configFileName>.yaml`

List all pods
- `kubectl get pods`

Running a command inside a pod
- `kubectl exec -it <podName> -- <command>`

Show logs 
- `kubectl logs <podName>`

Delete Pod 
- `kubectl delete pod <podName>`

Describe a pod (Print some information about a pod)
- `kubectl describe pod <podName>`

***

#### Deployment Commands 

List all running deployments 
    - `kubectl get deployments`

Print out details about a specific deployment
    - `kubectl describe deployment <deploymentName>`

Create a deployment out of a config file
    - `kubectl apply -f <configFileName>`

Delete a deployment 
    - `kubectl delete deployment <deploymentName>`

Restart a deployment 
    - `kubectl rollout restart deployment <deploymentName>`

*** 

## Types of Services

- Cluster IP - Sets up an easy-to-remember URL to access a pod. Only exposes pods in the cluster.
- Node Port - Makes a pod accessible from outside the cluster. Usually only used for dev purposes.
- Load Balancer - Makes a pod accessible from outside the cluster. This is the right way to expose a pod to the outside world.
- External Name - Redirects an in-cluster request to a CNAME url

*** 

Describe a service 
- `kubectl describe service <serviceName>`